hombre okichtli 
varón okichtli
mujer siwatl
persona tlakatl
gente tlakah
bebé piltsintli
niño konetl
muchacho telpochtli 
joven telpochtli
muchacha ichpochtli 
jovencita ichpochtli 
señorita ichpochtli
anciano koli 
abuelo koli
huérfano iknotl
anciana ilamatl
abuela ilamatl
profesor temachtiani
maestro temachtiani
alumno temachtili
aprendiz temachtili
gobernante tlahtoani
sabio tlamatini 
erudito tlamatini
comerciante pochtekatl
amigo ikniwtli
esposo tenamiktli
esposa siwatl
madre nantli
mamá nantli
padre tahtli
papá tahtli
hermano ikniwtli
hermana ueltiu
hijo kone
cuerpo nakayotl
carne nakatl
cabeza kuaitl
cuello kecholi
labios tentli
boca kamalotl
lengua nenepili
frente ixtli
cara ixtli
ojo ixpolotl
piocha piochtli
pecho elpantli
espalda kuitlapantli
codo moliktli
hombro ajkoli 
brazo ajkoli
mano maitl
dedo mapili
uña istetl
pierna metstli
nalga tsintamali
pene tepoli
testículo auakatl
vagina tepili
pie ikxitl
dedo mapili
dedo xopili
cabeza tsontekomatl
ombligo xictli
pájaro tototl
águila kuautli
zopilote tsopilotl
tecolote tekolotl
paloma uilotl
colibrí uitsitsilin
gallo kuanakatl
guajolote uexolotl
pollito piotl
codorniz solin
mariposa papalotl
luciérnaga kopitl
mosca sayolin
mosquito moyotl
coyote koyotl
perro chichi
perro itscuintli
gato mistontli
puma mistli
ocelote oselotl
conejo tochtli
liebre sijtli
mayate mayatl
chapulín chapolin
pinacate pinakatl
ardilla techalotl
zorrillo epatl
caballo kauayo
burro axno
burro poloko
puerco pitsotl
mono osomatli
oveja ichkatl
res kuakue
ajolote axolotl
pez michin
gusano okuilin
hormiga askatl
rana kueyatl
ratón kimichin
serpiente koatl
metl maguey
metl pita
quelite kilitl
árbol kuauitl
ahuehuete aueuetl
hierba malinali
chile chili
mole moli
guiso moli
atole atoli
tamal tamali
maíz sentli
frijol etl
tortilla tlaxkalli
vino oktli
pulque oktli
carne nakatl
hongo nanakatl
aguacate auakatl
sal istatl
mandarina otonlalax
pozole posolatl
pinole pinoli
dulce tsopelik
cacahuate kakauatl
caña akatl
tejocote texokotl
naranja lalax
plátano kuaxilotl
silla ikpali
libro amoxtli
avión tepostotl
ropa kemitl
taparrabos maxtli
huipil uipili
camisa koto
zapato kaktli
sombrero tsonakauili
papel amatl
libro amoxtli
refresco tsopelatl
dinero tomin
escuela temachtilkali
trabajo tekiti
casa chantli
casa kali
edificio kali
ciudad ueyaltepetl
pueblo altepetl
cerro tepetl
bosque kuaujtla
cueva ostok
milpa mili
montaña tepetl
manantial ameyali
mar ueyatl
mundo tlaltikpaktli
cielo iluikaltl
tianguis tiankistli
camino ojtli
biblioteca amoxkali
agua atl
viento ejekatl
aire ejekatl
tierra tlali
fuego tletl
piedra tetl
humo poktli
fierro tepostli
metal tepostli
noche youali
pluma iljuitl
papel amatl
chalchihuite chalchiuitl
jade chalchiuitl
aroma poktli
raíz neluayotl
día tonali
luna metstli
sol tonatiu
dios teotl
palabra tlajtolli
idioma tlajtolli
cultura toltekayotl
mexicaneidad mexikayotl
tiempo kauitl
conocimiento machilistli
música tlatsotsonalli
poesía xochikuikatl
nombre tokaitl
lagarto sipaktli
viento ejekatl
casa kali
lagartija kuetspalin
serpiente koatl
muerte mikistli
venado masatl
conejo tochtli
agua atl
perro itskuintli
mono osomajtli
hierba malinali
caña akatl
jaguar oselotl
águila kuautli
zopilote koskakuautli
movimiento olin
pedernal tekpatl
lluvia kiauitl
flor xochitl
velación tosostontli
velación ueitosostli
sequedad toxkatl
comida etsalkualistli
fiesta tekuiluitontli
fiesta ueitekuiljuitl
ofrenda tlaxochimako
barrimiento ochpanistli
fiesta tepeiljuitl
flamenco kecholi
encogimiento tititl
crecimiento iscali
tlapali colores
blanco istak
negro tliltik
rojo chichiltic
verde xoxoktik
azul xiujtik
gris nextik
morado kamojtik
lila kamojtik
amarillo kostik
grande uey
pequeño tepitsin
fuerte chikauak
bueno kuali
malo amokuali
nuevo yankuik
verdadero neli
temible mauistik
sorprendente mauistik
admirable mauistik
maravilloso tlamauisoltik
pobre iknotl
este inin
ese inon
aquel inon
uno se
dos ome
tres yei
cuatro naui
cinco macuili
seis chikuase
siete chikome
ocho chikuei
nueve chiknaui
diez matlaktli
veinte cempouali
cuarenta ompouali
yo nejuatl
nejua yo
ne yo
tú tejuatl
tú tejua
tú te
usted tejuatsin
él yejuatl
ella yejuatl
eso yejuatl
nosotros tejuantin
ustedes amejuantin
vosotros amejuantin
ellos yejuantin
ellas yejuantin
comer kua
dormir kochi
llorar choka
cantar kuika
hacer chiua
ayudar paleui
pagar tlaxtlaui
trabajar tekiti
poder uelia
acabar tlami
terminar tlami
enterrar toka
ir sembraryau
venir uala
contento paki
asustado maui
enfermo kokoa
vergüenza pinaua
decir iluia
llegar ahsi
alcanzar ahsi
pasar panoa
llamar notsa
mirar tlachia
esperar chia
leer poua
leer amoxpoua
dejar kaua
vender namaka
comprar koua
dar maka
amar tlazojtla
matar miktia
querer neki
leer poua
poner tlalia
apagar seua
decir ijtoa
tener pia
bañarse moaltia
empezar mopoua
comenzar mopoua
descansar moseua
sentarse moseui
difícil oui
rápido isiujca
rápidamente isiujca
hoy axkan
ahora axkan
ayer yalui
antier yeuiptla
mañana mostla
aqui nikan
allá ompa
dónde onkan
quién akin
porqué tleika
cuando ijkuak
cómo kenin
cuántos kezki
como yujki
y iuan
para ipan
con ika
sí kema
no amo
morir miqui
hundir ilaqui
siglo mācuīlpōhualxihuitl
y īhuān
y ihuan
no ahmo
méxico mexihco
década mahtlācxihuitl
méxico mēxihco
náhuatl náhuatl
estado tlahtohcayotl
estado tlahtohcāyōtl